Add docs for `vcpkg env` (#109)
microsoft/vcpkg-docs: vcpkg/commands/env.md

---
title: vcpkg env
description: Command line reference for the env command. Creates a clean build environment in your current terminal.
ms.author: viromer
ms.date: 7/20/2023
ms.prod: vcpkg
---

# vcpkg env

## Synopsis

> [!NOTE]
> This command is only supported on Windows.

```Console
vcpkg env [<optional command>] [--triplet=<triplet>] [--options]
```

## Description

> 

Reviewer: I think it could be useful to give a brief explanation of why a user might want to use this command.

Creates a clean build environment in your current terminal. The created environment is a
`cmd` session initialized to match the one vcpkg uses to build ports.

The session's configuration depends on your [triplet settings](../users/triplets.md). Use
the `--triplet` option to specify the triplet to target, otherwise, a [default triplet is
deduced](../users/config-environment.md#vcpkg_default_triplet). Depending on your settings
this may initialize a Visual Studio build environment via `vcvars`.

Most environment variables are cleared from the session, with the exception of the environment
variables specified in the [`VCPKG_KEEP_ENV_VARS`](../users/config-environment.md#vcpkg_keep_env_vars)
environment variable and the [`VCPKG_ENV_PASSTROUGH`](../users/triplets.md#vcpkg_env_passthrough)
triplet setting.

> Using the `--bin`, `--debug-bin`, `--include`, `--tools`, or `--python` options prepends the
> respective paths from the triplet's `installed` folder to the session's environment variables.
> See the build system [manual integration documentation](../users/buildsystems/manual-integration.md)
> to learn more about the `installed` folder's hierarchy.

Author: ```suggestion
Using the `--bin`, `--debug-bin`, `--include`, `--tools`, or `--python` options prepends the
respective paths from the triplet's `installed` folder to the session's environment variables.
Use these if you want to make tools and libraries installed by vcpkg available in the session.
See the build system [manual integration documentation](../users/buildsystems/manual-integration.md)
to learn more about the `installed` folder's hierarchy.
```

### Run a single command

```Console
PS C:\Users\vcpkg\vcpkg> vcpkg env "cmake --version"
cmake version 3.20.21032501-MSVC_2

CMake suite maintained and supported by Kitware (kitware.com/cmake).
```

### Preserve environment variables

```Console
PS C:\Users\vcpkg\vcpkg> $env:CLEARED_ENV_VAR="hello"
PS C:\Users\vcpkg\vcpkg> vcpkg env "set CLEARED_ENV_VAR"
Environment variable CLEARED_ENV_VAR not defined
PS C:\Users\vcpkg\vcpkg> $env:KEEP_ENV_VARS="CLEARED_ENV_VAR"
PS C:\Users\vcpkg\vcpkg> vcpkg env "set CLEARED_ENV_VAR"
CLEARED_ENV_VAR=hello
```

### Add `--tools` to the environment

```Console
PS C:\Users\vcpkg\vcpkg> vcpkg install minizip[tool]
PS C:\Users\vcpkg\vcpkg> vcpkg env --tools "minizip"
MiniZip 1.1, demo of zLib + MiniZip64 package, written by Gilles Vollant
more info on MiniZip at http://www.winimage.com/zLibDll/minizip.html

Usage : minizip [-o] [-a] [-0 to -9] [-p password] [-j] file.zip [files_to_add]

  -o  Overwrite existing file.zip
  -a  Append to existing file.zip
  -0  Store only
  -1  Compress faster
  -9  Compress better

  -j  exclude path. store only the file name.
```

## Options

All vcpkg commands support a set of [common options](common-options.md).

> 

Reviewer: Would it be useful to include a brief reasoning for why a user might want to use each of these options? For example, in what situations would a user want to add the triplet's installed `bin` folder to the session's `PATH` environment variable?

This might be obvious, but an explanation might be useful to some people.

---
title: vcpkg env

> description: Command line reference for the env command. Creates a clean build environment in your current terminal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Command-line reference for the env command. Creates a clean build environment in your current terminal.
```

ms.author: viromer

> ms.date: 7/20/2023

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ms.date: 8/8/2023
```

`cmd` session initialized to match the one vcpkg uses to build ports.

The session's configuration depends on your [triplet settings](../users/triplets.md). Use
the `--triplet` option to specify the triplet to target, otherwise, a [default triplet is
deduced](../users/config-environment.md#vcpkg_default_triplet). Depending on your settings
this may initialize a Visual Studio build environment via `vcvars`.

Most environment variables are cleared from the session, with the exception of the environment
variables specified in the [`VCPKG_KEEP_ENV_VARS`](../users/config-environment.md#vcpkg_keep_env_vars)
environment variable and the [`VCPKG_ENV_PASSTROUGH`](../users/triplets.md#vcpkg_env_passthrough)
triplet setting.

Using the `--bin`, `--debug-bin`, `--include`, `--tools`, or `--python` options prepends the
respective paths from the triplet's `installed` folder to the session's environment variables.
Use these if you want to make tools and libraries installed by vcpkg available in the session.
See the build system [manual integration documentation](../users/buildsystems/manual-integration.md)
to learn more about the `installed` folder's hierarchy.

> Optionally, you can specify a single command to be executed and the session terminated immediately
> afterwards.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Optionally, you can specify a single command to execute. The session will terminate immediately afterwards.
```
